>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, OCTOBER 4...
THE U.S. AND AFGHAN GOVERNMENTS
INVESTIGATE WHAT LED TO THE
BOMBING OF A HOSPITAL IN
AFGHANISTAN.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, INSIDE
A CONTROVERSIAL VOTER ID LAW IN
NORTH CAROLINA.
>> WHAT'S THE DRIVING FORCE
BEHIND THIS?
>> PARTISAN POLITICS.
>> THESE LAWS, IT SOUNDS LIKE
WHAT YOU'RE SAYING, WERE PASSED
AS MUCH FOR POLITICAL REASONS AS
SOME VAGUE SENSE OF JUSTICE.
>> THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT.
THERE'S NO QUESTION ABOUT IT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, NEW LIMITS
ON SMOG-CAUSING EMISSIONS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US."
DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS" IS
CALLING FOR AN INDEPENDENT
INTERNATIONAL INVESTIGATION OF
YESTERDAY'S U.S. AIRSTRIKE OF A
HOSPITAL IT RAN IN THE AFGHAN
CITY OF KUNDUZ.
TODAY, THE HUMANITARIAN AID
GROUP SAID THREE MORE PEOPLE
HAVE DIED FROM THE BOMBING,
BRINGING THE DEATH TOLL TO 22.
DOZENS MORE WERE WOUNDED.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS OFFERED HIS
"DEEPEST CONDOLENCES" TO WHAT HE
CALLED A "TRAGIC INCIDENT."
BUT THE PRESIDENT SAYS HE'S
WAITING FOR A PENTAGON
INVESTIGATION TO BE COMPLETED.
THE AFGHAN ARMY, BACKED BY U.S.
TROOPS, HAS BEEN FIGHTING THE
TALIBAN SINCE IT SEIZED THE CITY
LAST WEEK.
U.S. MILITARY OFFICIALS SAID
YESTERDAY'S AIRSTRIKE WAS A
RESPONSE TO "INSURGENTS WHO WERE
DIRECTLY FIRING UPON U.S.
SERVICE MEMBERS."
WHILE AFGHAN OFFICIALS SAY
TALIBAN FIGHTERS ROUTINELY FIRED
ON SECURITY FORCES FROM THE
HOSPITAL GROUNDS,
"DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS" TOLD
THE NEWSHOUR YESTERDAY:
"NO INSURGENTS WERE BASED AT THE
HOSPITAL BEFORE THE AIRSTRIKE."
THE FIGHTING HAS CAUSED ABOUT
4,000 AFGHANS FROM KUNDUZ TO
FLEE TO RED CRESCENT SHELTERS IN
A NEARBY PROVINCE, WHILE"
DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS" HAS
RELOCATED ITS KUNDUZ OPERATION
AND PATIENTS.
FOR MORE ON THE HOSPITAL
BOMBING, I AM JOINED BY PHONE
FROM KABUL, BY "NEW YORK TIMES"
REPORTER ALYSSA RUBIN.
>> THE LAST 24 HOURS YOU HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO CATCH UP WITH SOME
OF THE VICTIMS.
WHAT WAS THE SCENE THAT THEY
DESCRIBED?
>> IT WAS THE MIDDLE OF THE
NIGHT, SO PEOPLE WERE COMPLETELY
CONFUSED BY WHAT WAS HAPPENING,
THEY HEARD ENORMOUS EXPLOSIONS
AROUND THEM.
THEN THERE WOULD BE PAUSES, THEN
RENEWED EXPLOSIONS.
THEY WERE -- SOME PEOPLE, THOSE
WHO SURVIVED WERE HELPED TO GET
INTO BUNKERS BY THE HOSPITAL
STAFF AND YOU HAVE TO REALIZE
SOME OF THESE PEOPLE WERE, FOR
ONE THING, THEY WERE QUITE STICK
OR THEY WOULDN'T HAVE BEEN IN
THE HOSPITAL.
AND THERE WERE FAMILY MEMBERS
WITH THEM AS WELL, AND WHAT
THEIR EXPERIENCE WAS A SENSE
THAT THEY WERE IMMINENTLY GOING
TO DIE.
AT LEAST TWO OR THREE PEOPLE
SAID THEY THOUGHT IT WAS THEIR
LAST MOMENTS ON EARTH.
>> YOU EVEN TALKED TO SOME
PEOPLE WHO HAD COME IN FROM THE
FIGHTING, WHO ALREADY HAD
SUFFERED LOSSES.
>> YES.
I MEAN, SEVERAL OF THE PEOPLE
THERE HAD EITHER LOST FAMILY
MEMBERS OR HAD THEM BADLY
WOUNDED AND HAD COME TO THE
HOSPITAL FOR REFUGE SO THEY
ALREADY HAD GONE THROUGH
BOMBINGS OR GUNSHOTS AND BEEN IN
THE WRONG PLACE AT THE WRONG
TIME.
THESE WERE ALL CIVILIANS AND
THEN OF COURSE THERE WAS, I
THINK, A TERRIBLE SHOCK WHEN
THEY EMERGED WHEN THE BOMBING
STOPPED AND SAW THE DESTRUCTION,
NOT JUST AT THE HOSPITAL BUT OF
PATIENTS WHO DIED DURING THE
ATTACK.
>> WHAT IS THE STATUS OF THE
INVESTIGATION?
I MEAN, PREVIOUS PRESIDENT HAMID
KARZAI HAD TO DEAL WITH THE
POLITICAL BLOWBACK FROM THESE
FRIENDLY FIRE OR ACCIDENTAL
BOMBINGS AND AIR RAIDS.
>> WELL, I THINK IT HAS BEEN
VERY INTERESTING, I MEAN TODAY
THERE HAS NOT BEEN SUBSTANTIAL
COMMENTARY ON IT.
THERE HAS BEEN SOME ON OFFICIAL
MEDIA BUT THERE HAVE BEEN MORE
PICTURES ON THE TELEVISION OF
THE ARMY HANDING OUT FOOD IN
AREAS THAT THEY CONTROL IN
KUNDUZ, BUT NOT THE KIND OF
WIDESPREAD CRITICISM I WOULD
HAVE EXPECTED, FRANKLY, AND I AM
NOT SURE IF PEOPLE ARE ABSORBING
WHAT HAPPENED OR IF THERE IS
ENORMOUS AMBIVALENCE BECAUSE ON
THE ONE HAND MANY PEOPLE WOULD
LIKE THE TALIBAN TO BE REMOVED
FROM THE CITY AND THE CITY TO GO
BACK INTO GOVERNMENT HANDS, AND
THEN I AM NOT SURE THE AFGHAN
MILITARY CAN DO IT ON ITS OWN SO
THEY ARE HESITANT TO BE TOO
CRITICAL.
IT IS A VERY DIFFICULT SITUATION
TO FIGURE OUT.
AND HAMID KARZAI AS YOU RECALL
LED A LOT OF THE CRITICISM OF
THE UNITED STATES IN THOSE --
WHEN THERE WERE CIVILIAN
CASUALTIES AND THE NEW PRESIDENT
HAS SAID MUCH LESS THAN, MUCH
LESS THAT IS CRITICAL LATELY.
>> ALYSSA RUBIN JOINING US FROM
KABUL.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR A FIFTH DAY,
RUSSIA IS CARRYING OUT
AIRSTRIKES INSIDE SYRIA.
RUSSIAN DEFENSE OFFICIALS SAY
THEIR JETS BOMBED TEN ISLAMIC
STATE, OR ISIS, TARGETS IN THE
PAST 24 HOURS, INCLUDING A
MILITANT TRAINING CAMP.
BUT THE LEADERS OF BRITAIN AND
TURKEY BOTH SAID TODAY RUSSIA IS
MAKING A "MISTAKE" BACKING
PRESIDENT BASHAR-AL-ASSAD IN THE
SYRIAN CIVIL WAR.
BRITISH PRIME MINISTER DAVID
CAMERON SAYS FEW RUSSIAN BOMBS
ARE HITTING ISIS.
THE REST, AREAS CONTROLLED BY
OPPONENTS OF THE ASSAD REGIME
SUPPORTED BY THE U.K. AND THE
U.S.
THE ISRAELI GOVERNMENT IS
BARRING NEARLY ALL PALESTINIANS
FROM ENTERING JERUSALEM'S OLD
CITY FOR 48 HOURS.
THE MOVE COMES A DAY AFTER A
PALESTINIAN FATALLY STABBED AN
ISRAELI SOLDIER WALKING WITH HIS
WIFE AND CHILDREN AND A RABBI
WHO CAME TO THE SOLDIER'S AID.
OVERNIGHT, ANOTHER PALESTINIAN
STABBED AND WOUNDED AN ISRAELI
TEENAGER IN THE OLD CITY.
ISRAELI POLICE RESPONDING TO THE
ATTACKS SHOT AND KILLED BOTH
ASSAILANTS.
PALESTINIANS WHO LIVE OR WORK IN
THE OLD CITY ARE ALLOWED IN
UNTIL A JEWISH HOLIDAY ENDS
TOMORROW.
PALESTINIANS AND ARAB-ISRAELIS
HAVE PROTESTED THE MEASURE.
ISRAELI SOLDIERS TODAY USED TEAR
GAS TO DISPERSE ROCK-THROWING
PALESTINIAN PROTESTERS IN
JERUSALEM.
THE FRENCH RIVIERA SAW TWO
MONTHS WORTH OF RAIN IN TWO
HOURS TODAY, CAUSING LETHAL
FLASH FLOODS.
SEVEN INCHES OF RAIN FELL IN
CANNES AND OTHER CITIES, CAUSING
RIVERS AND STREAMS TO OVERFLOW.
PEOPLE WERE TRAPPED IN A
RETIREMENT HOME, IN CAMPSITES,
AND IN CARS SUBMERGED IN
TUNNELS.
FRENCH PRESIDENT FRANCOIS
HOLLANDE, WHO VISITED THE AREA,
SAYS AT LEAST 16 PEOPLE DIED AND
OTHERS ARE MISSING.
HERE IN THE U.S., RECORD
RAINFALL CONTINUES TO POUND
PARTS OF THE EAST COAST.
FOURTEEN INCHES OF RAIN HAS
FALLEN THIS WEEKEND IN COLUMBIA
AND CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA,
FORCING RESIDENTS TO EVACUATE
THEIR HOMES AND IT HAS LEFT
THOUSANDS WITHOUT POWER.
75 MILES OF I-95, 200 STATE
ROADS, AND 40 BRIDGES WERE
CLOSED TODAY DUE TO FLOODING.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT OFFICIALS
WARNED RESIDENTS TO STAY
INDOORS.
COASTAL FLOOD WARNINGS HAVE BEEN
ISSUED AS FAR NORTH AS NEW
JERSEY.
THE COAST GUARD HAS FOUND DEBRIS
FROM A MISSING AMERICAN CARGO
SHIP.
BUT THERE HAS BEEN NO SIGHTING
OF THE SHIP, ITS LIFEBOATS, OR
ANY OF THE 33 MEMBER CREW.
THE COAST GUARD HAS RECOVERED A
LIFE RING FROM THE SHIP "EL
FARO," WHICH HAS NOT BEEN HEARD
FROM SINCE SENDING OUT A
DISTRESS SIGNAL THREE DAYS AGO.
RESCUERS HAVE ALSO SPOTTED LIFE
JACKETS AND A CARGO CONTAINER
THOUGHT TO BE FROM THE SHIP.
THE 790-FOOT SHIP HEADING FROM
JACKSONVILLE, FLORIDA, TO SAN
JUAN, PUERTO RICO, GOT CAUGHT IN
ATLANTIC WATERS AS TROPICAL
STORM JOAQUIN WAS TURNING INTO A
HURRICANE.
THE SEARCH HAS COVERED 850
SQUARE NAUTICAL MILES.
>> Sreenivasan: SINCE 2011, 15
MOSTLY REPUBLICAN-CONTROLLED
STATES HAVE PASSED LAWS
REQUIRING VOTERS TO PRESENT A
GOVERNMENT-ISSUED PHOTO I.D. AT
THE POLLS IN ORDER TO VOTE.
NORTH CAROLINA IS ONE OF THEM,
AND IT WENT MUCH FURTHER,
PASSING REFORMS TWO YEARS AGO
THAT PROPONENTS SAY IMPROVE
ELECTION INTEGRITY AND PREVENT
VOTER FRAUD.
CRITICS SAY THE NEW REQUIREMENTS
MAKE IT HARDER FOR SOME PEOPLE
TO VOTE, INCLUDING RACIAL
MINORITIES.
BOTH SIDES HAVE AIRED THEIR
ARGUMENTS IN A FEDERAL TRIAL.
NO MATTER WHO WINS THE CASE, IN
TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JEFF
GREENFIELD REPORTS: HARDBALL
POLITICS ARE AT PLAY.
>> IT'S A CRIME THAT WE STAND
HERE 27 DAYS AFTER THE 50TH
ANNIVERSARY OF THE SIGNING OF
THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT AND WE
HAVE LESS VOTING RIGHTS TODAY.
>> Reporter: THAT FIERY
DENUNCIATION BY REVEREND WILLIAM
BARBER, HEAD OF NORTH CAROLINA'S
N.A.A.C.P., MAY SEEM OUT OF A
DIFFERENT TIME AND PLACE.
>> GLORY! GLORY! GLORY!
>> Reporter: BUT BARBER BELIEVES
NEW LAWS THAT ALTER HOW, WHERE,
AND WHEN CITIZENS CAN VOTE ARE
DESIGNED TO DISENFRANCHISE AS
MANY BLACK VOTERS AS POSSIBLE.
>> ALL OF THESE ATTACKS ON
VOTING RIGHTS STARTED RIGHT
AFTER PRESIDENT OBAMA WON IN
STATES, AND IT CHANGED THE
DYNAMIC.
PEOPLE CAME TOGETHER WHO HAD
NOT BEEN COMING TOGETHER IN THE
SOUTH.
WE KNOW THAT THIS IS AN ATTEMPT
TO ROLL US BACKWARDS.
>> Reporter: BARBER AND THE
N.A.A.C.P. BELIEVE PHOTO VOTER
I.D. LAWS IN NORTH CAROLINA AND
MORE THAN A DOZEN OTHER STATES
SUPPRESS MINORITY VOTER TURNOUT,
BECAUSE BLACK AND LATINO VOTERS
ARE THE MOST LIKELY TO LACK AN
ACCEPTABLE PHOTO I.D. OR THE
DOCUMENTS TO GET ONE.
DECREASES IN VOTER TURNOUT HAVE
BEEN FOUND IN STATES THAT
REQUIRE PHOTO I.D.'S TO VOTE.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE 2008 AND
2012 ELECTIONS, THE NONPARTISAN
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
ATTRIBUTED A 2% DECREASE IN
TURNOUT IN KANSAS AND A 2-3%
DECREASE IN TENNESSEE TO THEIR
PHOTO I.D. LAWS.
AND MANY VOTERS IN NORTH
CAROLINA ARE STRUGGLING WITH
THEIR NEW VOTER I.D. LAW THAT
GOES INTO EFFECT IN 2016.
94-YEAR OLD ROSANELL EATON IS
ONE OF THEM.
HER DAUGHTER DROVE HER 250 MILES
BACK AND FORTH FROM THE
DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND
SOCIAL SECURITY OFFICES TO GET A
PHOTO I.D., BECAUSE THE NAME ON
HER DRIVER'S LICENSE-HER MARRIED
NAME DID NOT MATCH HER MAIDEN
NAME ON HER VOTER REGISTRATION
FROM OVER 70 YEARS AGO.
SO WHEN PEOPLE SAY, IT REALLY
ISN'T THAT HARD UNDER THIS NEW
LAW TO GET WHAT YOU NEED.
>> IT'S NOT EASY AT ALL.
IT WAS JUST UNNECESSARY.
>> Reporter: THE EXPERIENCE
REMINDED HER OF THE HURDLE SHE
FACED THE FIRST TIME SHE TRIED
TO REGISTER TO VOTE IN
SEGREGATED NORTH CAROLINA ALMOST
THREE QUARTERS OF A CENTURY AGO.
THREE WHITE MEN TOLD HER...
>> ...TO STAND RIGHT STRAIGHT
AND TOWARDS THE WALL AND LOOK
REPEAT THE PREAMBLE OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
SO, I DID AS THEY COMMANDED.
>> Reporter: YOU RECITED THE
PREAMBLE TO THE U.S.
CONSTITUTION?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: THE 1965 VOTING
RIGHTS ACT CHANGED THINGS
DRAMATICALLY.
BY 2012, ABOUT 75% OF SOUTHERN
BLACKS WERE REGISTERED.
AND FOR 50 YEARS, THAT VOTING
RIGHTS ACT EMPOWERED THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT TO REVIEW ANY CHANGES
IN VOTING LAWS IN ALL STATES OR
PARTS OF STATES WITH A HISTORY
OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION.
ONETIME PROTESTERS, LIKE MARTIN
LUTHER KING PROTÉGÉE MICKEY
MICHAUX, BECAME LEGISLATORS.
15 YEARS AGO, MICHAUX WAS PART
OF EFFORTS BY A DEMOCRATIC
LEGISLATURE AND GOVERNOR TO MAKE
VOTING MUCH EASIER, WITH:
IF YOU WERE AWAY FROM HOME, YOU
COULD VOTE WHERE YOU WERE, AND
PRE-REGISTRATION FOR 16 AND 17-
YEARS-OLDS WHO WERE GETTING
THEIR DRIVER'S LICENSE.
MICHAUX IS EXCEPTIONALLY CANDID
ABOUT WHY THIS WAS DONE:
>> BASICALLY A PARTY SITUATION.
MOST OF YOUR AFRICAN-AMERICANS
VOTED DEMOCRATIC.
AND SO IN ORDER NOT TO LOSE THAT
BASE VOTE, THEY SAW A WAY WHERE
YOU COULD INCREASE AFRICAN-
AMERICAN VOTING AND TAKE CREDIT
FOR HAVING PASSED ALL OF THESE
OPENINGS IN YOUR VOTER LAWS.
>> Reporter: IT SOUNDS LIKE WHAT
YOU'RE SAYING, WERE PASSED AS
MUCH FOR POLITICAL REASONS AS
SOME VAGUE SENSE OF JUSTICE.
>> THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT.
THERE'S NO QUESTION ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: AND IT WORKED: IN
THE PAST DECADE, 70% OF BLACKS
IN NORTH CAROLINA VOTED EARLY,
COMPARED WITH ABOUT 50% OF WHITE
VOTERS.
BUT IN 2010, THE POLITICS OF
NORTH CAROLINA WERE TURNED
UPSIDE DOWN.
REPUBLICANS GAINED CONTROL OF
BOTH HOUSES OF THE STATE
LEGISLATURE FOR THE FIRST TIME
SINCE RECONSTRUCTION.
AND WITH THAT CONTROL CAME A
CONCERTED EFFORT TO UNDO THE
CHANGES THE DEMOCRATS HAD PUT
INTO PLACE JUST A FEW YEARS
EARLIER.
IN 2013, THE REPUBLICAN-
DOMINATED LEGISLATURE PASSED A
VOTER I.D. LAW, AND THE NEWLY-
ELECTED REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR
SIGNED IT.
BACKERS CITED VOTER FRAUD, BUT
IN THE PAST DECADE, THE NORTH
CAROLINA STATE BOARD OF
ELECTIONS HAS REFERRED ONLY FOUR
CASES OF ALLEGED VOTER
IMPERSONATION TO PROSECUTORS,
AND NONE HAVE RESULTED IN A
CONVICTION.
NATIONALLY, RESEARCH BY A LOYOLA
LAW SCHOOL PROFESSOR FOUND ONLY
31 "CREDIBLE ALLEGATIONS" OF
VOTER IMPERSONATION IN ONE
BILLION-VOTES BETWEEN 2000 AND
2014.
>> EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE
MASSIVE FRAUD, IT GIVES THE
ELECTORATE A BETTER SENSE THAT
THIS ELECTION IS FAIR.
>> Reporter: FRANCIS DELUCA
DISAGREES THAT VOTER I.D. IS A
SOLUTION IN SEARCH OF A PROBLEM.
HE HEADS THE CIVITAS INSTITUTE,
A CONSERVATIVE THINK TANK IN
RALEIGH.
>> COULD YOU EVER PROVE THERE
WAS A PROBLEM IN A BAR WITH
UNDERAGE DRINKING IF YOU DID NOT
REQUIRE THEM TO SHOW AN I.D.
CARD?
VOTER IMPERSONATION IS
IMPOSSIBLE TO VERIFY WITHOUT
SOMEBODY HAVING TO PROVE WHO
THEY ARE.
THE OTHER THING THAT'S
IMPORTANT, YOU CAN'T DO
MEDICAID, YOU CAN'T, WELL, CAN'T
TRAVEL, CAN'T GO TO A BANK AND
CASH A CHECK WITHOUT A PHOTO
I.D.
YOU CAN'T EVEN GO INTO THE
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OFFICE
BUILDING WITHOUT A PHOTO I.D.
>> Reporter: AS THE VOTER ID
BILL WORKED THROUGH THE
LEGISLATURE, THE U.S. SUPREME
COURT THREW OUT THE"
PRE-CLEARANCE" SECTION OF THE
FEDERAL VOTING RIGHTS ACT
ARGUING THAT SOUTHERN STATES
WERE BEING JUDGED "BASED ON 40
YEAR-OLD FACTS HAVING NO LOGICAL
RELATIONSHIP TO THE PRESENT
DAY."
WITHIN WEEKS, NORTH CAROLINA'S"
VOTER I.D." BILL BECOME A 57-
PAGE BILL THAT:
CUT A WEEK OF EARLY VOTING,
ENDED SAME DAY REGISTRATION
DURING EARLY VOTING, CURTAILED
SUNDAY VOTING, ENDED OUT-OF-
PRECINCT VOTING, ENDED PRE-
REGISTRATION FOR 16 AND 17-YEAR-
OLDS.
REPUBLICAN STATE REPRESENTATIVE
DAVID LEWIS CHAIRED THE
ELECTIONS COMMITTEE WHEN THE
BILL PASSED.
HE SAYS IT MAKES THE VOTING
PROCESS FAIRER.
>> THE RULES DON'T NEED TO BE
TWEAKED IN SUCH A WAY THAT
ADVANTAGES ONE SIDE OR THE
OTHER.
WE SAY, TREAT EVERYBODY THE
SAME.
>> Reporter: WITH EARLY VOTING
CUT FROM 17 TO 10 DAYS, ONE OF
THE TWO EARLY VOTING SUNDAYS
WENT AWAY.
THAT LIMITED THE SO-CALLED"
SOULS TO THE POLLS" EFFORT,
WHEN MANY BLACK CHURCHES
TRANSPORT CONGREGATES TO THEIR
POLLING STATIONS.
THAT LOOKS LIKE, FROM THE
SUPERFICIAL LEVEL, AT LEAST,
THAT HAD TO HAVE BEEN TARGETED
TO THE AFRICAN-AMERICAN
COMMUNITY.
>> I CERTAINLY DON'T THINK SO.
MANY OF OUR STATE AGENCIES ARE
NOT REQUIRED TO WORK ON SUNDAYS.
EVEN IF YOU WANT TO ATTEST OR
BELIEVE THAT WE DID SOMETHING
FOR PARTISAN ADVANTAGE, IT
CERTAINLY WASN'T DONE WITH A
RACIALLY DISCRIMINATORY INTENT.
>> Reporter: BUT THAT'S NO
CONSOLATION FOR DALE HICKS, A
FORMER MARINE WHO SERVED IN
AFGHANISTAN.
LAST YEAR, HICKS AND HIS WIFE
MOVED FROM JACKSONVILLE, NORTH
CAROLINA, TO RALEIGH.
A FEW DAYS BEFORE THE 2014
ELECTION, HE CALLED HIS ELECTION
BOARD TO LEARN HIS NEW POLLING
PLACE.
>> THEY TOLD ME ACTUALLY, "NO,
THIS MEANS YOU CAN'T VOTE IN
RALEIGH, BECAUSE YOUR ADDRESS ON
YOUR REGISTRATION SAYS
JACKSONVILLE.
YOU CAN'T VOTE IN JACKSONVILLE,
EVEN THOUGH YOUR ADDRESS SAYS
JACKSONVILLE, YOU DON'T LIVE IN
JACKSONVILLE, SO IT'S NOT
VALID."
I BASICALLY FELT LIKE I LOST THE
RIGHT TO VOTE AT THAT POINT.
>> Reporter: WITH NO MORE SAME-
DAY REGISTRATION DURING EARLY
VOTING OR OUT-OF-PRECINCT
VOTING, HICKS COULD ONLY CAST A
PROVISIONAL BALLOT, WHICH WENT
UNCOUNTED UNDER THE NEW VOTING
RULES.
>> IT JUST MADE ME ANGRY.
I KNEW THESE BARRIERS WERE BEING
PUT UP, YOU KNOW.
AND IT WORKED.
>> Reporter: IF PARTISAN
POLITICS IS BEHIND THIS FIGHT,
IT RAISES AN INTRIGUING
QUESTION.
COURTS GENERALLY APPROVE
LEGISLATION THAT IS POLITICALLY
MOTIVATED.
THEY ARE MUCH, MUCH TOUGHER ON
LEGISLATION THAT SEEMS RACIALLY
INSPIRED.
BUT WHAT HAPPENS IF THOSE TWO
SEEM HOPELESSLY ENTANGLED.
ONE RESPONSE COMES FROM CARTER
WRENN, A LONG-TIME REPUBLICAN
POLITICAL CONSULTANT IN NORTH
CAROLINA.
FROM YOUR PERSPECTIVE, WHAT'S
THE DRIVING FORCE BEHIND THIS?
>> PARTISAN POLITICS, PURE AND
SIMPLE.
I MEAN, RACE, IT GETS MIXED UP
IN IT, BUT IT'S REPUBLICANS
LOOKING TO HELP REPUBLICANS.
>> Reporter: IS THERE A MORAL
EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN WANTING MORE
PEOPLE TO VOTE, AND WANTING
FEWER PEOPLE TO VOTE?
>> YOU KNOW, I'M NOT SURE.
NOBODY'S MOTIVATIONS ARE PURE
HERE.
IF THE PEOPLE THAT DIDN'T VOTE
WERE MORE LIKELY TO VOTE
REPUBLICAN, I DON'T THINK FOR A
MINUTE THE DEMOCRATS WOULD BE
TRYING TO GET THEM TO VOTE.
>> IT IS RACE.
THE GREATER MAKEUP OF THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY IN THIS STATE
IS AFRICAN-AMERICAN.
SO IF THE WAY THAT YOU-YOU GRAB
POWER IS YOU TAKE BACK THOSE
THINGS THAT HAVE AFFECTED
AFRICAN-AMERICANS TO GO TO THE
POLLS AND VOTE.
>> Reporter: THE SAME DAY NORTH
CAROLINA'S VOTING REFORMS WERE
SIGNED INTO LAW, THE N.A.A.C.P,
SUED TO STOP THEM.
SO DID THE NONPARTISAN LEAGUE OF
WOMEN VOTERS AND THEN, THE US
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT.
>> THIS IS AN INTENTIONAL
ATTEMPT TO BREAK A SYSTEM THAT
WAS WORKING.
IT DEFIES COMMON SENSE.
>> Reporter: NORTH CAROLINA'S
OWN STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS
FOUND THAT 318,000 VOTERS LACKED
THE NECESSARY PHOTO ID TO VOTE
ONE THIRD OF THEM WERE AFRICAN
AMERICANS, WHO MAKE UP ONLY ONE
FIFTH OF THE ELECTORATE.
FOLLOWING A THREE WEEK TRIAL
THIS SUMMER, A FEDERAL JUDGE IS
NOW DECIDING WHETHER OR NOT
THOSE NORTH CAROLINA VOTING
REFORMS ARE CONSTITUTIONAL.
BACKERS OF THE LAW POINT OUT
THAT BLACK VOTER TURNOUT IN 2014
ACTUALLY ROSE 16% FROM THE
PREVIOUS MIDTERMS IN 2010.
BUT ACTIVISTS CREDIT THIS TO A
COMPETITIVE U.S. SENATE RACE IN
2014 AND TO THEIR GET-OUT-THE-
VOTE CAMPAIGNS.
WHICHEVER WAY THE JUDGE HERE
RULES AND WITH SIMILAR LAWSUITS
IN OTHER STATES, THE ISSUE SEEMS
DESTINED AGAIN FOR THE US
SUPREME COURT, WHOSE DECISION
COULD HELP DETERMINE WHO VOTES
NEXT YEAR AND PERHAPS WHO WINS
THE WHITE HOUSE.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DO VOTER
REGISTRATION LAWS VARY FROM
STATE TO STATE?
VIEW OUR INTERACTIVE MAP ONLINE
AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS PAST WEEK,
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY UNVEILED NEW RULES TO
REDUCE SMOG, BY LIMITING THE
POLLUTING GASES EMITTED BY U.S.
FACTORIES AND CARS.
ALSO, INDIA, THE WORLD'S THIRD-
LARGEST AIR POLLUTER AFTER THE
U.S. AND CHINA, ANNOUNCED A $2.5
TRILLION PLAN TO REDUCE ITS
CARBON EMISSIONS OVER THE NEXT
15 YEARS.
CHINA HAS A NEW PLAN, TOO.
JOINING ME HERE IN THE STUDIO TO
DISCUSS THESE DEVELOPMENTS IS
NAVEENA SADASIVAM FROM
"INSIDE CLIMATE NEWS."
>> SO THE NEW SMOG RULES, THERE
WAS TENSION THERE, THE
ENVIRONMENT LIST WANTED TO
DECREASE IT MUCH LOWER, INDUSTRY
WANTED TO LEAVE IT THE SAME,
WHAT DID THE EPA DO?.
THEY ARE TRYING TO WALK A FINE
LINE BETWEEN DOING WHAT IS
MANDATED TO DO, WHICH IS PROTECT
AIR QUALITY, AND IMPROVE PUBLIC
HEALTH FOR MEMORIES, BUT ALSO
ENSURING THAT THE COST TO THE
INDUSTRY AREN'T ONEROUS, SO WHAT
THEY ENDED UP DOING IS SETTING
THE STANDARD AT 70 PARTS PER
BILLION, WHICH IS THE WEAKER
SIDE OF WHAT SCIENTISTS HAVE
RECOMMENDED.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY.
SO PARTS PER BILLION, JUST TO
TRY TO PUT THAT IN PERSPECTIVE,
DOES THAT REALLY MATTER IF IT
GOES FROM 75 TO 70 OR 70 TO 65?
THE EPA WANTED TO TALK ABOUT HOW
MANY LIVES IT WOULD SAVE AND ALL
OF THESE DIFFERENT COSTS, BUT
WOULDN'T IT BE BETTER IF THEY
MOVED IT LOWER?
>> IT WOULD HAVE BEEN IN TERMS
OF SAVING LIVES, I THINK THE
DIFFERENCE IN THE ASTHMA CASES
WERE SEVERAL MILLION BETWEEN
LOWERING IT TO 65 PARTS PER
BILLION AND 70 PARTS PER BILLION
AND IN TERMS OF SAVING LIVES AS
WELL.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THE
INDUSTRY SAYS IT IS GOING TO
TAKE SOME TIME TO TRY TO PUT
THESE SCRUBBERS, THESE FILTERS
ON THESE SMOKESTACKS.
>> RIGHT WE HEARD FROM SOME
INDUSTRY GROUPS SAYING THEY ARE
STILL STRUGGLING TO MEET 2008
STANDARDS THAT WERE SET.
>> Sreenivasan: ANOTHER PIECE
OF NEWS STARTING TO CROSS THE
WIRES IS BOTH CHINA AND
INDEPENDENT I CAN'T IN THE PAST
COUPLE OF WEEKS SAYS HERE ARE
OUR PLANS FOR TACKLING CLIMATE
CHANGE DO, THESE MATTER?
>> WE DO, THEY ARE QUITE
SUBSTANTIAL, SIGNIFICANT
EMISSION REDUCTION BUT WE ARE TO
REMEMBER THEY ARE NOWHERE CLOSE
TO WHAT WE NEED TO ACTUALLY
STAVE OFF THE WORSE EFFECTS OF
CLIMATE CHANGE, SCIENTISTS ARE
SAYING WE NEED TO KEEP
TEMPERATURE RISE BELOW
TWO DEGREES CELSIUS AND THE DATA
SO FAR, OVER 140 COUNTRIES AND
DEPENDING ON THE ANALYSIS YOU
LOOK AT ONLY 2.7 TO 2.5 SO WE
HAVE A LONG WAY TO GO, BUT
CHINA, THEY GIVE THE
INTERNATIONAL MINUTE MOMENTUM
GOING INTO THE PARIS TALKS, YOU
KNOW, THE SIGNS ARE ALL THERE
THAT WE WILL HAVE A PRETTY
STRONG AGREEMENT AT THE END OF
THE YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHERE DOES
THE U.S. STAND IN THE AND HOW
DOES IT HELP IN THESE TALKS?
>> SO THE U.S. ITSELF SORT OF
STARTED OFF BY TABLING THE LEAD
ON THIS ISSUE, FOR A LONG TIME
THE WESTERN COUNTRIES ARE SAYING
IF THE U.S. IS NOT TAKING THE
LEAD, AND IF THEY ARE NOT TAKING
THE LEAD THERE IS NO POINT IN US
STEPPING UP BECAUSE WE ARE NOT
THE CREATORS OF THIS PROBLEM.
>> Sreenivasan: RIGHT.
>> BUT THE U.S. HAS TAKEN IN THE
LAST FEW CAREERS WE HAVE SEEN IT
RELEASE, AIMING TO CUT CARBON
POLLUTION FROM POWER PLANTS SO
THAT SENT A VERY STRONG SIGNAL
IT WAS SERIOUS ABOUT MAKING
COMMITMENTS TO ATTACK CLIMATE
CHANGE.
>> Sreenivasan: NAVEENA
SADASIVAM FROM INSIDE CLIMATE,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: NEW RULES FOR
HOME MORTGAGES HAVE TAKEN EFFECT
THIS WEEKEND.
THE SO-CALLED "KNOW BEFORE YOU
OWE" RULES ARE MEANT TO PROTECT
HOME BUYERS FROM SURPRISES AT
THEIR CLOSING OR COMMITTING TO
PAYMENTS THEY DON'T UNDERSTAND.
YESTERDAY, I SPOKE WITH "WALL
STREET JOURNAL" REPORTER JOE
LIGHT ABOUT THESE NEW RULES.
>> WHAT IS THE AVERAGE CONSUMER
LIKELY TO SEE AS A DIFFERENCE
BECAUSE OF THESE RULES?
>> ONE OF THE FORMS WOW GET
RIGHT AFTER YOU MAKE A MORTGAGE
APPLICATION AND A FORM YOU GET
RIGHT BEFORE CLOSING IS GOING TO
BE SIMPLIFIED.
THE TERMS ARE SUPPOSED TO BE
EASIER TO UNDERSTAND, YOU ARE
SUPPOSED TO UNDERSTAND IF YOU
HAVE AN ADJUSTABLE RATE AND, YOU
KNOW, THE RATE WILL GO HIGHER
AFTER A CERTAIN NUMBER OF YEARS.
>> THE SECOND CHANGE IS BEFORE
CLOSING YOU ARE SUPPOSED TO GET
THESE DOCUMENTS AT LEAST THREE
BUSINESS DAYS BEFORE CLOSING,
AND THAT IS DESIGNED SO YOU HAVE
TIME TO UNDERSTAND WHAT YOU ARE
GETTING INTO BEFORE YOU SIGN ON
THE DOTTED LINE.
NOW, IT SEEMS TO MAKE SENSE, BUT
IF YOU MAKE ANY CHANGES WITHIN
THAT THREE-DAY WINDOW, THAT
RESETS THE THREE DAYS, AND AS
FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE TRYING TO,
YOU KNOW, CLOSELY TIME HOME
CLOSINGS, RESETTING THAT
THREE-DAY WINDOW CAN LEAD TO
SOME HEADACHES.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW ARE WE
GOING TO KNOW IF THESE RULES
HAVE HELPED CONSUMERS?
>> I GUESS WE WON'T REALLY KNOW
UNTIL THE NEXT FINANCIAL CRISIS
HITS, RIGHT, AND THEN WE WILL
SEE WHETHER THE CONSUMERS WHO
ARE ABLE OR UNABLE TO PAY THEIR
LOANS FEEL LIKE THEY KNEW WHAT
THEY WERE GETTING INTO.
THE THING TO WATCH OUT FOR IN
THE NEXT COUPLE OF MONTHS HOE IS
WHETHER THE REAL ESTATE INDUSTRY
IS READY, THE RAE INDUSTRY HAS
GONE THROUGH THIS LARGE
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE OVER, THEY
NEED TO BE READY ON MONDAY SO
WHAT WILL HAPPEN OVER THE NEXT
FEW MONTHS WE WILL SEE WHETHER
OR NOT HOME CLOSINGS ARE
HAPPENING ON TIME OR WHETHER,
YOU KNOW, SOME OF THESE MORTGAGE
LENDERS ARE, OR REAL ESTATE
AGENTS WEREN'T READY AND WE SEE
A LOT OF CLOSING DELAYS.
>> Sreenivasan: JOE LIGHT OF
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL",
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS.
>>
>> AND FINALLY UTAH CONGRESSMAN
IS RUNNING TO BE SPEAKER OF THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, HE
ANNOUNCED HIS BID TODAY TO
COMPETE WITH CALIFORNIAN
KEVIN MCCARTHY WHO IS CURRENTLY
THE HOUSE MAJORITY LEADER.
HE HAS BEEN A MEMBER OF THE
HOUSE SINCE 2009.
FLORIDA CONGRESSMAN DANIEL
WEBSTER IS ALSO RUNNING.
BOEHNER WILL STEP DOWN FROM THE
SPEAKER'S CHAIR AT THE END OF
THE MONTH AFTER NEARLY FIVE
YEARS ON THE JOB.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, I AM
HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.